# T1:  Amino acids, proteins
[Sample MCQs and SAQs for amino acids, proteins 2020.pdf](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/secure.notion-static.com/7087b845-c632-4a5f-8351-e6bf8b22fbb2/Sample_MCQs_and_SAQs_for_amino_acids_proteins_2020.pdf)
###### tags: `MDSA20210 - molec`

### **Sample MCQs:**
1. Which of these statements about naturally occurring amino acids is true:
A. Have more than one α-carbon atom.
B. Are uncharged at a pH of 7.
C. Can only have two charged functional groups.
**D. Are chiral, except glycine.**
E. Occur in nature mainly or exclusively in the optically active D-form.

2. Which amino acid residue is least likely to be found on surfaces of globular proteins in aqueous solution?
A. Aspartate
B. Serine
**C. Alanine (most hydrophobic)**
D. Cysteine
E. Lysine

3. The amino acid **side-chain** which most commonly interacts to form covalent bonds in proteins
A. contains an amino group.
B. can form an ester with an alcohol.
**C. contains a sulfhydryl group. (cysteine)**
D. is that of serine.
E. is that of aspartate.

4. Covalent modifications of collagen include all of the following EXCEPT
A. hydroxylation of proline.
B. glycosylation of hydroxylysine.
C. oxidation of lysine or hydroxylysine.
D. formation of covalent cross-links by linking lysine and/or hydroxyallysine groups.
**E. stabilization of the mature fibre with disulfide bonds.**

5. Which of the following statements about protein structure is correct?
A. The alpha-helix conformation is stabilized by hydrophobic interactions.
B. The beta-sheet conformation is rarely found in globular proteins.
**C. The folding of a polypeptide into a globular structure results in an interior enriched with
hydrophobic amino acids.**
D. The primary structure does not influence the native tertiary structure.
E. The subunits of proteins with quaternary structure associate through covalent bonds.

6. Which of the following is responsible for the maintenance of protein secondary structure?
A. salt bridges (ionic interactions between positively and negatively charged side chains)
**B. hydrogen bonds**
C. phosphorylation of side chains
D. hydrophobic interactions
E. disulfide crosslinks

7. A major force that contributes to the conformation of proteins and, in globular proteins, occurs primarily in their interior is
A. hydrogen bonds.
B. charged dipoles.
**C. hydrophobic interactions.**
D. disulfide bridges.
E. hydration by water. 

8. Which of these amino acids contains a hydroxyl functional group in its side chain
A. phenylalanine
B. lysine.
C. alanine.
D. glycine.
**E. serine.**

9. Which of the following mutations would you expect to cause the most drastic alteration in the functional performance of a polypeptide chain? (Assuming the replacement is not at the active site)
**A. Replacement of aspartate with lysine. (changes charge)**
B. Replacement of glycine with alanine.
C. Replacement of aspartic acid with glutamic acid.
D. Replacement of lysine with arginine.

10. amino acids are classified according to the nature of their side chain. All of the following amino acids are correctly classified EXCEPT
A. Serine: polar, uncharged.
B. Aspartate acid: polar, acidic/negatively charged.
C. Lysine: polar, basic/positively charged.
**D. Alanine: polar, uncharged. (not polar, hydrophobic)**
E. Phenylalanine : hydrophobic, aromatic.

11. All of the following statements about the alpha-helix are true EXCEPT:
A. the alpha-helix is right-handed.
B. there are 3.6 amino acids per turn of the alpha-helix.
C. the R groups of the amino acids are externally directed.
**D. the alpha-helix is stabilized primarily by hydrophobic interactions. (main stabilizing force: H-bonds)**
E. the structure of the alpha-helix was predicted before it was observed in a protein

13. Which statement below is most correct regarding the alpha helical structure of polypeptide chains in proteins?
**A. It is primarily dependent upon hydrogen bonding.**
B. It is primarily dependent upon disulfide linkages.
C. It is found in all proteins.
D. It refers to interactions between adjacent chains in fibrous proteins.

14. The alpha helix structure of a protein can be considered an example of:
A. quaternary structure
B. tertiary structure
**C. secondary structure**
D. primary structure
E. none of the above

### **Sample SAQs:**
1. Describe how Myoglobin and Haemoglobin react differently to changes in Oxygen levels.

2. write out the **simplified chemical formula** **(just like what's in the lecture notes)** for an example of each of the following amino acid side chains
    - hydrophobic aliphatic
    - polar uncharged
    - negatively charged
    - positively charged

3. Write out the Michaelis Menten equation describing how an enzyme responds to different substrate concentrations. Say what the terms stand for and mean.

4. Describe briefly the 4 levels of protein structure.

5. Describe briefly what Km is and give an example of how it can be used to measure enzyme
activity.
