# T2: Membrane Potentials and Excitable Tissues

> The following three examples relate to the significance of cellular membrane potentials in health and disease. Whilst you will not be examined on clinical situations in this module **these examples highlight the learning objectives of your lectures on membrane potentials, action  potentials,  and the neuromuscular  junction.** **Please read and think  about each example** before attending the tutorial. **Please be prepared to discuss the role of membrane potentials, etc, in each setting.** Please remember that the goal of the tutorial is for you to link lecture material with these examples and not go into detailed discussion on the clinical features of disease or current treatments. 
> 
> Within the tutorial session you will be assigned to one “breakout” group where you willdiscuss one of the questions below in-depth. Your group will be asked to present this discussion to the whole tutorial class after approximately 15-20 minutes of discussion. The assignment associated with this tutorial is outlined on the Tutorial 2 worksheet.

## Question 1: 
How does digoxin work to increase calcium levels and thus cardiac contractility? 
- "Digoxin induces an increase in intracellular sodium that will drive an influx of calcium in the heart and cause an increase in contractility. Cardiac output increases with a subsequent decrease in ventricular filling pressures." (NCBI) 
- How digoxin increases intracellular sodium: "The end-point of digoxin's effect is to open membrane calcium channels, resulting in an increased calcium influx into cells." (Healio)
### In your discussion consider:
- What is the physiological role of the Na+/K+ATPase?
    - "The Na^+^K^+^ -ATPase pump helps to maintain osmotic equilibrium and membrane potential in cells. The sodium and potassium move against the concentration gradients. The Na^+^K^+^ -ATPase pump maintains the gradient of a higher concentration of sodium extracellularly and a higher level of potassium intracellularly."
- Consider how cardiac myocytes might regulate their intracellular calcium levels.
    - "Calcium (Ca2+) plays a central role in cardiomyocyte excitation-contraction coupling." (Science Direct)
    - "Calcium homeostasis in cardiomyocytes is characterized by continuous waves of intracellular Ca2+ traversing the cytoplasm every second, thereby enabling muscle contraction..." (Journals.physiology) 
    - "The depolarization of the plasma membrane of the cardiac muscle cell causes opening of the L-type calcium channels which triggers the..." (Pubmed.NCBI)
### Information for Question #1:
#### Cardiac Glycosides 
The active compound in foxgloves is digoxin. Digoxin is one of a class of compounds called the cardiac glycosides.  Therapeuticuses of cardiac glycosides primarily involve   the treatment of cardiac failure. Their utility results from an increased cardiacoutput by increasing the force of   contraction. By increasing intracellular calcium stores   the cardiac glycosides increase calcium-induced calcium release and thus contraction. Digoxin works by binding to and inhibiting the Na^+^K^+^ -ATPase. 
#### Digitalis Poisoning
In 1785 Dr. William Withering of Birmingham wrote, "The Foxglovewhen given in very large and quickly repeated   doses, occasions sickness, vomiting, purging, giddiness,   confused vision, objects appearing green or yellow;   increased secretion of urine, with frequent motions to part with it, and sometimes inability to retain it; slow pulse, even as slow as 35 in a minute, cold sweats, convulsions, syncope, death. I am doubtful whether it does not sometimesexcite a copious flow of saliva.” 
#### Clinical description
Signs and symptoms of acute digitalis (digoxin or digitoxin) poisoning by ingestion include primarily gastrointestinal effects (nausea and vomiting), hyperkalemia, and cardiovascular effects (bradydysrhythmias [heart rate <60 or atrioventricular block] or tachydysrhythmias [ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation or atrial tachycardia with 2:1 block])

## Question 2: 
Describe a neuronal action potential and the role of myelin in neuronal signalling.
- neuronal action potential definition: a brief all-or-none depolarization or repolarization of the membrane which reverses polarity in the neuron; has a threshold (a voltage it must attain to continue transmitting electrical signal) and refactory period (a period during which it can't respond)
- role of myelin in neuronal signalling: insulates neuron's axon, speeding up conductivity and transmission of electricl impulses

What role might de-myelination play in disease? 
- de-myelination would mean neurons would lose the insulation around their axons, slowing down or even stopping conductivity and transmission of electrical impulses

### In your discussion consider:
- The physiological role of myelin.
    - role of myelin: insulates neuron's axon, speeding up conductivity and transmission of electricl impulses
### Information for Question #2
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is believed to be an auto-immunemediated disease in which the nerves of the central nervoussystem (brain and spinal cord) degenerate. In   multiplesclerosis, inflammation causes degradation of the myelinsheath. In addition, the nerves themselves are damaged. As more and more nerves are affected, a person experiences aprogressive interference with functions that are controlled by the nervous system such as vision,   speech, walking, writing, and memory. About 350,000 people in the U.S. have multiple sclerosis. Usually, a person is   diagnosed with multiple sclerosis between 20 and 50 years of age, but multiple sclerosis has been diagnosed in   children  and in the elderly. Multiple sclerosis is twice as likely to occur in Caucasians as in anyother group. Women are twice   as likely as men to be affected by multiple sclerosis earlier in life.

## Question 3: 
Describe the sequence of events at the neuromuscular junction and how they initiate the skeletal muscle action potential. 
1. action potential arrives at axon terminal
2. membrane depolarization leads to opening of voltage-gated calcium channels and calcium entry into the axon terminal
3. leads to fusion of ACh containing vesicles and ACh release into synaptic cleft
4. ACh finds nicotinic receptors and binds
5. ligand-gated ion channel opens allowing Na^+^ entry, causing a graded depolarization
7. the graded depolarization typically exceeds threshold for nearby voltage-gate Na^+^ and K^+^ channels, so an action potential occurs in the muscle fiber
9. acetylcholinesterase enzyme breaks down ACh, when ACh no longer bound to receptors in ion channels in the muscle fiber close and the membrane returns to resting potential

How might this be affected in Myasthenia Gravis?
- as myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease involving the body attacking ACh nicotinic receptors, the events of a neuromuscular junction will not complete properly
    - ACh will have a harder time finding nicotinic receptors to bind to, which means the trigger opening ligand-gated ion channels is faulty
    - diffusion of sodium and potassium ions into the intracellular matrix will not occur as easily, and so graded and action potentials will not either

### In your discussion consider:
- What is the physiological role of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at the NMJ? 
    - "The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is a transmembrane allosteric protein that mediates transduction of chemoelectric signals throughout the nervous system by opening an intrinsic ionic channel. This rapid pore opening enables flow of Na+, K+, and, in several instances, Ca2+ ions across the cell membrane." (Science Direct)
- How does acetylcholine induce activation of the skeletal muscle?
    - "When acetylcholine binds to acetylcholine receptors on skeletal muscle fibers, it opens ligand gated sodium channels in the cell membrane. Sodium ions then enter the muscle cell, stimulating muscle contraction." (World of Molecules)
### Information for Question #3
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune neuromuscular disorder in which the body “attacks” the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Myasthenia gravis causes weakness in voluntary (skeletal) muscles. The muscle weakness can lead to a variety of symptoms, including: 
- Breathing difficulty because of weakness of the chest wall muscles
- Chewing or swallowing difficulty, causing frequent gagging, choking, or drooling
- Difficulty climbing stairs, lifting objects, or rising from a seated position
- Difficulty talking
- Drooping head
- Facial paralysis or weakness of the facial muscles
- Fatigue
- Hoarseness or changing voice
- Double vision
- Difficulty maintaining steady gaze
- Eyelid drooping
