# Review
###### tags: `PHYS20100 - cell sig.`

## Learning objectives: (know for exam)
- describe basic structure and function of human cells including component parts
    - extend from basic principles of cell biology
    - complement molecules in medicine
- explain the generation and significance of membrane potentials
    - integrate with basic tissues and early dev/muscculoskeletal
    - extremely important for semester 2 modules
- demonstrate an understanding of essential features of excitable tissues
    - integrate with basic tissues and early dev/human form
    - extremely important for respiratory/vascular/cardiac biology
- describe basic features of common receptors and signalling cascades, and how they contribute to autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine signalling
    - fundamental knowledge for endocrinology and neurology

## Exam general details
- Dec 17, 4:30 - 6:30 PM
- 85% of final module grade
- format:
    - 40 MCQ worth 40% final exam grade
    - 10 SAQ worth 60% final exam grade
        - cell structure and function: 2 questions
        - nerve and muscle: 3 nerve questions, 3 muscle questions
        - cell-cell signalling: 2 questions

### Cell signalling
- focus on basic principles
- look for overlapping functions
- llook for overlapping cascades/effector molecules
- different cells use similar cascades to regulate similar functions
- what dictates variety in responses?
    - different receptors
    - different adaptors

### Objective of "example" lectures
- response to wound/infection
    - requires autocrine, paracrine, endocrine signals
    - requires change in phenotype
    - requires changes in gene expression
    - RTK-mediated transcription factors
- fight or flight
    - describe how Ad/NAd can cause varied effect (think smooth muscle)
    - GPCR signalling; same signal different receptor/different G-alpha/different effect
- ischemia
    - example where profound changes in gene expression required
        - transcriptional control
    - biological response driven by a RTK (angiogenesis)

### Receptors
#### G-protein couple receptors
- what is a g-protein coupled receptor?
- what type of ligand binds GPCRs?
- how are signals transduced by GPCRs?
- describe one example of a physiological response mediated by a GPCR

#### Steroid hormone receptors
- what are steroid hormone receptors?
- what regulates their activity?
- how do they regulate cell responses?
- how do they contribute to endocrine signalling?
- think about gene transcription

#### Classes of tyrosine kinase receptors
- receptor tyrosine kinases
    - receptor has intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity
    - insulin, epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), colony-stimulating factor (CSF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
- receptor-associated tyrosine kinase
    - membrane-bound receptor activates an intracellular tyrosine kinase such as janus kinase (JAK)
    - prolactin, growth hormone, erythropoietin, many of the interleukins and inteferons (cytokines)

## Practice questions:
1. Which ion channel state correctly describes the phase of action potential it is associated with?
a. Voltage-gated Na+ channels are inactivated in a resting neuronal membrane.
b. Open voltage-gated K+ channels cause the depolarizing upstroke of the action potential.
c. Open voltage-gated K+ channels cause after hyperpolarization.
d. The sizeable leak through voltage-gated K+ channels determines the value of the resting membrane potential.
e. Opening of voltage-gated chloride channels is the main factor causing rapid repolarization of the membrane at the end of an action potential.

2. Which cell structure contains the enzyme required for oxidative phosphorylation?
a. Inner membrane of mitochondria
b. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
c. Rough endoplasmic reticulum
d. Outer membrane of mitochondria
e. Matrix of mitochondria

3. Briefly explain the main characteristics and give an example of the following types of cell-cell communication:
a. Paracrine: 
b. Endocrine: 

4. a. Draw a labelled diagram of the plasma membrane of a eukaryotic cell. Explain which components affect fluidity of the membranes.

4. b. Identify, and briefly describe, two ways that ions such as Na+ can cross the cell membrane.

5. Identify four cytoplasmic sub-cellular organelles and briefly describe their structure and functions.

6. Describe with the help of a diagram how VEGF mediates adaptation to hypoxia regulated by HIF-α.

7. Which statement best describes the arrangement of filaments in a skeletal muscle fibre?
a. Myosin and actin filaments form helical structures to enable contraction
b. Myosin and actin filaments are arranged in myofibrils surrounded by sarcoplasmic reticulum
c. Myosin and actin filaments are surrounded by transverse tubules in order to allow action potential propagation
d. Myosin and actin filaments are attached to dense bodies which stabilise sarcomeres
e. Myosin filaments are perpendicular to actin forming sarcomeres

8. Skeletal muscle contraction
a. Always results in shortening of muscle fibres
b. Is dependent upon influx of Ca2+ from the extracellular space
c. Is dependent upon the binding of ryanodine and dihydropyridine
d. Is dependent upon myoplasmic Ca2+ concentrations
e.All of the above

9. Discuss the sequence of events that drive smooth muscle contraction once intracellular calcium levels have increased.

10. Describe the steps in a neuronal action potential.
